A UMCC framework settled on an efficient wireless network allows users to benefit from multimedia services in an ubiquitous, seamless and interoperable way. In this context MCC and HetNets are viewed as infrastructures providing together a key solution for the major facing problems: the former allows to offload application to powerful remote servers, shortening execution time and extending battery life of mobile devices, while the latter allows the use of small cells in addition to macrocells, exploiting high-speed and stable connectivity in an ever grown mobile traffic trend. In order to fulfill the computation offloading efficiently, in the following chapters we explore techniques aiming to move the computing application towards the cloud, considering a non-trivial multi-objective optimization approach that takes into consideration the tradeoff between the energy consumption of the SMDs and the time for executing the application. The aim of the optimization is to find the percentage of application offloading that minimizes the proposed cost function, in such a way that only a part of the application is transfered and computed outside, whereas the rest of the application is computed locally.

The chapter 2 deals with the partial offloading technique in a centralized cloud scenario. The results show that exists a particular offloading percentage value fitting the system in case of simultaneously high data and network workload, differently from the simple yes/no offloading decision which would move the entire application or would perform it locally. In chapter 3 the partial offloading technique is applied using a utility function model arising from the economic world. It aims to measure the QoS, in order to choose the best AP in a HetNet for running the partial computation offloading. The goal is to save energy for the SMDs and to reduce computational time. In chapter 4 the proposed UMCC framework and the partial computation offloading are applied to a vehicular environment for handling a real-time navigation application. In this case, we consider also cloudlets and distributed clouds, so that the SMDs can exploit road side units and other neighbor devices for delegating a shared application.

The content of the following chapters was extracted from publications [P3],[P4], and [P5].