---
date: 2017-05-21T17:51:57+02:00
title: Introduction
---

According to the flagship publication of the United Nations World Urbanization Prospect, more than one half of the world population is living nowadays in urban areas, and about 70% will be city dwellers by 2050. Furthermore, the world population is estimated to increase in the second half of the 21st century, while the urban areas are expected to absorb all the predicted growth and to draw in some of the rural population. The United Nations report predicts that, by mid-century, there will be 27 megacities, with at least 10 million population, while at least half of the urban growth in the coming decades will occur in small cities with less than 500,000 people, envisioning therefore that cities, big or small, are becoming a determining shift in the organization of human society. Cities and megacities are predicted to magnify problems such as difficulty in waste management, scarcity of resources, air pollution, human health concerns, traffic congestion, and inadequate, deteriorating and aging infrastructures.

Concurrently with such urbanization effect, an extraordinary phenomenon concerning the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is happening: smart mobile devices are becoming an essential part of human life and the most effective and convenient communication tools, not bounded in time and place. According to the Cisco Visual Networking Index, the number of mobile-connected devices has already overtaken the number of people in the world, and by 2018 it will be over 10 billion, including Machine to Machine (M2M) modules. Overall mobile data traffic is expected to have nearly an 11-fold increase in the next five years.

Urbanization tendency and smart mobile expansion are going to reach a relevant convergence point through the concept of smart city, an icon of a sustainable and livable city, projecting the ubiquitous and pervasive computing paradigms to urban spaces, focusing on developing city network infrastructures, optimizing traffic and transportation flows, lowering energy consumption and offering innovative services. It is through ICT that smart cities are truly turning smart [^1], in particular by means of the exploitation of smart mobile devices, forming together with cloud computing the Mobile Cloud Computing (MCC), since, as suggested by Michael Batty, to understand cities we must view them not simply as places in space but as systems of networks and flows [^2].

[^1]: M. Dohler, C. Ratti, G. Paraszczak and G. Falconer, Smart Cities [guest editorial], IEEE Commun. Mag. vol 51 ...
[^2]: B. Batty, "The New Science of Cities".