---
date: 2017-05-21T17:51:57+02:00
title: Abstract
---

This thesis collects the outcomes of a Ph.D. course in Electronics, Telecommunications, and Information Technologies Engineering and it is focused on the study and design of techniques able to optimize resources in distributed mobile platforms. 
It is related to a typical smart city environment, to enhance quality, performance and interactivity of urban services.
The subject is the operation of computation offloading, intended as the delegation of certain computing tasks to an external platform, such as a cloud or a cluster of devices. Offloading the computation tasks can effectively expand the usability of mobile devices beyond their physical limits and may be necessary due to limitations of a system handling a particular task on its own.

The computation offloading within an ecosystem as a urban community, where a large amount of users are connected towards even multiple devices, is a challenging subject. In a very close future, smart cities will be peculiar sources of intensive computing tasks, since they are conceived as systems where e-governance will be not only transparent and fast, but also oriented to energy and water conservation, efficient waste disposal, city automation, seamless facilities to travel and affordable access to health management systems. Also traffic will need to be monitored intelligently, emergencies foreseen and resolved quickly, homes and citizens provided with a wide series of control and security devices. All these ambitious aspirations will require the deployment of infrastructures and systems where devices will generate massive data and should be orchestrated in a collective way, to pursue synergic goals. In this context, the computation offloading is an operation dealing with the optimization of urban services, to reduce costs and consumption of resources and to improve contact between citizens and government.

This dissertation is organized in three main parts, dealing with the optimization of the resources in a smart city background from different points of view.

The first part introduces the Urban Mobile Cloud Computing (UMCC) framework, a system model that takes into account a series of features related to Heterogeneous Networks (HetNets), cloud architectures, various characteristics of the Smart Mobile Devices (SMDs) and different types of smart city application, performed to pursue several goals.

The second part deals with a partial offoading operation, considering to delegate only a portion of the computation load to a cloud infrastructure. It is focused on the tradeoff between energy consumption and execution time, in a non-trivial multi-objective optimization approach. Furthermore, a utility function model developed from the economic field is introduced. It takes into account a series of parameters related to the UMCC, showing that, when the network is overloaded, the partial offoading permits to achieve the target throughput values with an energy consumption and a computational time reduced, if compared with the total offoading of the computation tasks. In addition, the proposed UMCC framework and the partial computation offoading are applied to a vehicular environment for handling a real-time navigation application, so that the SMDs can exploit road side units and other neighbor devices forming clusters for delegating a shared application. It is shown that the clusterization allows to reduce the consumed energy in case of high traffic scenarios, optimizing the cluster size for different populations size and various offoading policies.

Finally, in the third part, the problem of Cell Association (CA) in a UMCC framework deals with the system as a community, thinking about to improve the collective performance and not only the achievement of a single device. A probabilistic algorithm that uses biased-randomization techniques is proposed as an efficient alternative to exact methods, which require unacceptable levels of computational time to solve real life instances. This probabilistic algorithm is able to provide near-optimal solutions in real time, thus outperforming by far the solutions provided by existing greedy heuristics. Since this algorithm takes into account all users in the assignment process, it avoids the selfish or myopic behavior of the greedy heuristic and, at the same time, is able to quickly find near-optimal solutions for allocation of the avaiable resources.